# Serverless P2P messengers

## Disambiguation

"P2P" is ill defined, thus we discuss its conflicting meanings separately:

* #pan_mesh_dtn
* #hardware
* #lan_messenger
* #wan_crowdsourcing
* cryptocurrency/blockchain

## Commonalities

* Many definitions call for client communication without mandated custom intermediaries.
* "Server" can also mean either a technicality (socket programming) and a privileged and manually administered node within the topology
* Keywords (imprecise buzzwords): decentralized, distributed.

## Definition

Where did the term "P2P" originate from?

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peer-to-peer

> Peer-to-peer (P2P) computing or networking is a distributed application architecture that partitions tasks or workloads between peers. Peers are equally privileged, equipotent participants in the network. [...] The architecture was popularized by the file sharing system Napster, originally released in 1999.

Basically in the 90s, you could find centralized file hosts (FTP, BBS) where people would upload their wares from where others could later download them. Then came a new model where everyone could store their wares on premise and others could access it directly without having to upload/download to such centralized hosts and that was called P2P file sharing. So the term originates from a specific type of distributed storage where instead of operating centralized nodes with costly spacious HDDs and paying an arm and a leg for bandwidth costs, their specs could be greatly reduced by allowing peers (who either have or want the files) to chime in.

The original intention of messaging projects which variously advertise themselves with loosely related terms such as "P2P", decentralized, distributed, federated, independent, blockchain-based, serverless was possibly of related nature: to allow a new competitor in the messaging apps space to enter without a huge investment. Just look at how many millions of dollars operation of the centralized Signal (or the matrix.org home server) costs.

Applying the term to messengers is not trivial and I think it should be avoided if possible, especially as cryptocurrency scammers started using this label for their marketing efforts. However, I would say that such messengers would apply a network topology that minimizes the use of centralized nodes which could pose as bottlenecks or cost centers and should do as much computing on the edge nodes (the device within your hand) as feasible to enable this. The sustained growth of capacity would thus be ensured by the growth of the user base.

This also sounds to be in line with the spirit of unhosted web apps.

Some misleadingly advertise themselves for enhanced anonymity and privacy. For such, the only scalable architecture proven so far was similar to centrally operated mixnet-based email remailers from the 90s (also loosely inspiring the similarly centrally operated Tor network). None of these are resistant to censorship either, despite what various advertising campaigns wants us to believe.

One can ask whether each client gets to "keep" a copy of their own UGC (friends, messages, attachments) as if they had an complete backup or profile take-out updated in real time. Or if instead a user blindly entrusts such storage duties to the vendor to then access it piecewise later on, possibly resulting in total data loss if anything happens to the vendor?

Some think that "P2P messengers" should provide for pure anarchism as in not relying on any third party hosted infrastructure or vendor human resources at all, but this can be refuted extensively.
